# SBF Distances 2021 – Updated calibration 2025

This repository includes two tables containing SBF distances and associated quantities as published in Jensen et al. 2021 and 2025. The observational data used for the SBF measurements come from the Hubble Space Telescope WFC3/IR instrument in the F110W bandpass.

The first file is ApJS_255_21_SBFdistances2021. It contains the published values used by Jensen et al. 2021 in ApJS 255:21, https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4365/ac01e7. The SBF targets were drawn from a total of six different HST programs, and are primarily a mix of elliptical galaxies from the MASSIVE survey (C-P Ma et al. 2014) and Type Ia supernova hosts (HST program PI Peter Milne). The SBF distances in the 2021 paper were computed using an SBF calibration zero point tied to large samples of ground-based SBF distances in the Virgo and Fornax clusters. The ground-based SBF distances themselves were directly calibrated through six individual galaxies that had  Cepheid distances; because Cepheid host galaxies avoid cluster cores, the calibration does not assume any Cepheid-based mean distances to these clusters – see Sec 2.4 of Blakeslee et al. 2021, 911, 65 (https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4357/abe86a) for further details and references.

The color corrections used to derive the SBF absolute magnitudes were determined using PanSTARRS (g-z) colors calibrated to the ACS (F475W-F850LP) system from Jensen et al. 2015 as described in the Jensen et al. 2021 paper. **For important details about the velocities reproduced in these files, please see the notes below.**

###

The second file is ApJ_987_87_SBFdistances2025, Jensen et al. 2025, ApJ, 987, 87, https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/addfd6 .
The new SBF distances in the 2025 paper were based on the original SBF apparent magnitudes from the 2021 paper with two important changes: 1) the distance scale zero point was changed to a new zero point derived from JWST NIRCam TRGB distances to nearby elliptical galaxies, mostly in Fornax and Virgo, calibrated in turn using the geometrical maser distance to NGC 4258 (Anand et al. 2024 and Anand et al. 2025); and 2) the PanSTARRS (g-z) colors were re-measured using annuli matching the SBF measurements. Details can be found in the Jensen et al. 2025 paper. The updated color measurements affected individual galaxy distances differently, but had a net effect that partially offsets the change in the zero point. The new SBF calibration (both zero point and slope) results in an insignificant change in the measured value of H0, but individual galaxy distances shift by varying amounts. The second file reproduces the 2021 distance moduli and shows the new distances. For more details, please see Jensen et al. 2025 at the link above.

Overall, the new calibration results in an average offset in the distance modulus of -0.011 ± 0.005 mag with rms scatter of 0.04 mag. This implies a change in the distance scale of a factor of 0.995 ± 0.002 relative to the 2021 distances, meaning that our new distances are on average 0.5% ± 0.2% closer.  The new TRGB zero-point and updated colors have opposing effects on the measured distances.

**Important notes about the velocities provided in these data files:**

Both data files include the same 4 sets of velocities in the columns labeled:  ‘v_gal’,  ‘v_grp’, ‘v_flow’, and ‘v_2M++’.  All of these velocities are provided in the CMB frame (i.e., a frame at rest with respect to the cosmic microwave background), but they differ in whether they are for individual galaxies or groups, and in what corrections were or were not applied. Unfortunately, these details were omitted in the published paper; thus, we provide them here.

The **v_gal** column lists the observed CMB-frame cz values for each individual galaxy, downloaded from the Extragalactic Distance Database (EDD; Tully et al. 2009, https://edd.ifa.hawaii.edu/).  For these individual cz velocities, no corrections (apart from transformation to CMB frame) were applied. In particular, there is no group averaging, no cosmological corrections, and no flow model corrections.

The **v_grp** column lists group-averaged CMB-frame velocities downloaded from the EDD with the 2nd-order cosmological correction term applied, as given in Eq (5) of the COSMICFLOWS-3 paper (Tully et al 2016, https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/0004-6256/152/2/50), i.e., “(1+0.5(1-q0)z-1/6[1-q0-3q0^2+j0]z^2)”. Thus, if using v_grp to derive the Hubble constant, the cosmological correction term to the velocity should not be applied, as it is already included.

The **v_flow** column lists group-averaged CMB-frame velocities with the 2nd-order cosmological correction applied as for v_grp, as well as a correction for peculiar motions based on the Bayesian linear flow model of Graziani et al. (2019, MNRAS, 488, 5438). Note that this is not the preferred flow model (see Blakeslee et al. 2021 for further details).

The **v_2M++**  columns lists group-averaged CMB-frame velocities with the 2nd-order cosmological correction applied as for v_grp, as well as a correction for peculiar motions from the Carrick et al. (2015, MNRAS, 450, 317) flow model, which was derived from the density field reconstructed from the 2M++ redshift compilation (Lavaux & Hudson 2011, MNRAS, 416, 2840). This model resulted in a significant reduction in the scatter for the Hubble diagram.
